Title: Success Stories Archives - Luke Coutinho
Content:
Success Stories Archives - Luke Coutinho
Main Website
Programs
Book a Consultation
Consult with Luke
With Integrative Team
Quick Links
Healing philosophy
Talks and Collaborations
The Eco System
Integrative Team
Books
Holistic Health Store
Log InRegister
Lifestyle
Exercise
Sleep
Healthy DIY
Senior’s Health
Child Health
Condition Management
Cancer
Mental Health
Weight Management
Pregnancy
Women’s Health
Beyond Medicine
Immunity
Yoga and Meditation
Nutrition
Intermittent & Dry Fasting
Recipe Corner
Youcare Products Science
Success Stories
Courses
Courses
Courses Account
Search
Search
HomeAll ArticlesSuccess Stories
Success Stories
20JulJuly 20, 2024
Stage 1 Ovarian Cancer to Clear PET Scan: Aishwarya’s Incredible Journey
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:17:23+05:30"My life completely fell off its axis in September with a sudden unexpected discovery of a tumor on my ovary. I had to undergo urgent surgery - a complete hysterectomy due to a stage 1 ovarian cancer diagnosis. Having lost both my parents to cancer, I completely understood the importance of a holistic healing...
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp
By Team LukeSuccess Stories, Newcancer, cancer journey, cancer management, cancer story, cancer testimonial, clear PET scan, hope after cancer, Inspiration, PET scan, remission, stage 1 ovarian cancer, success story0 Comments
Read more...
05JulJuly 5, 2024
From Fear to Freedom: Meet Keshav Who Lost 11 Kgs and Overcame His Fear of Multiple Sclerosis Relapse
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:17:24+05:30This 32-year-old banker came to us with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) - tingling sensations and numbness in the left side of the body, which were managed with steroids. He also struggled with premature balding.
The side effects of his ongoing medications included:
Deranged liver parameters
Irregular lipid profile
Excess fat
Elevated total leucocyte count (TLC)
And more.
"I...
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp
By Team LukeSuccess Stories, Newfat loss, hope, keshav monga, multiple sclerosis, success story, testimonial, trasnformation0 Comments
Read more...
01JulJuly 1, 2024
From Struggling to Walk 1 KM to 10K Steps: Conquering IBS, Shedding Inches, and Embracing an Active Life!
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:17:28+05:30
This 40-year-old came to us after undergoing a hysterectomy. Being on heavy antibiotics, led to severe gut issues including IBS.
Beyond IBS, she was also diagnosed with:
Fatty liver
Severe diarrhea
Abdominal pain cramps
Plantar fasciitis
Diabetes
High cholesterol
Low energy levels
And more
This is her now.
What worked for her?
Activating the 5 intelligent systems of...
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp
By Team LukeSuccess Stories, Newabdominal pain, cramps, diabetes, fatty liver, high cholesterol, IBS, low energy levels, Plantar fasciitis, Severe diarrhea0 Comments
Read more...
30MayMay 30, 2024
How Niharika Lost 8 kg and Several Inches in Just 90 Days!
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:17:35+05:30Struggling with a fat loss plateau despite your best efforts?
Here’s how Niharika lost 8 kg and several inches in just 90 days!
Where we started
"Despite trying various methods like intermittent fasting and keto, I struggled to shed more than 2 to 3 kgs, often regaining weight after cheat days. After exhausting all options, I discovered...
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp
By Team LukeSuccess Stories, Newfat loss, holistic workouts, inch loss, lean muscle, metabolism, sleep hygiene, stress management, success story, testimonial, weight loss0 Comments
Read more...
09MayMay 9, 2024
16 Kgs Lighter, Happier, Healthier, and More Confident: Meghaa’s Journey Is All the Inspiration You Need
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:17:41+05:3016 kgs lighter, happier, healthier, and more confident version of herself
Meghaa's fat loss journey is all the inspiration you need to move to action!
How it started
“The nightmare started with my struggle for weight loss. I tried all fad diets to reach that ideal size or fit into that dress. The results of all that...
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp
By Team LukeSuccess Stories, Newbody transformation, fat loss, meghaa, success story, testimonial, transformation0 Comments
Read more...
01MayMay 1, 2024
This 11-YO Went From 72.2 to 67.5 kg and Got Her Thyroid Levels Under Control in Just 4 Weeks!
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:17:45+05:30Diagnosed with deranged thyroid levels, this 11-year-old went from 72.2 to 67.5 kg and got her parameters under control in just 4 weeks!
Ashwika came to us with:
Deranged thyroid profile, liver and renal parameters
Imbalanced blood sugar levels
Excess fat gain
And more.

What worked for her?

We decoded her lifestyle and focused on:

Designing a personalized...
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp
By Team LukeSuccess Stories, Newderanged thyroid, fat loss, success story, testimonial, thyroid, thyroid levels, weight loss0 Comments
Read more...

11AprApril 11, 2024

Phalguni Lost 14 Kgs, Reduced HbA1c After 6 Years, and Her Cancer Is Now in Remission!
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:17:50+05:30From Struggle to Strength: Phalguni lost 14 kgs, reduced HbA1c after 6 years, and her cancer is now in remission!

Before and after

"My journey with Team Luke and Vidhi started after my cancer treatment. I was told I had thyroid cancer and my lymph nodes were affected. So once the surgery and ablation were done,...
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp
By Team LukeSuccess Stories, Newcancer, fat loss, hba1c, remission, thyroid, thyroid cancer, weight loss0 Comments
Read more...

22MarMarch 22, 2024

From 78 Kgs to 63 Kgs and 47% to 77% Lung Capacity: This 60-YO Businesswoman’s Journey Is #goals!
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:17:54+05:30From 78 kgs to 63 kgs

40 mg to 2.5 mg steroids

47% to 77% lung capacity

And battling brain fog, fatigue, debilitating pain, and lethargy to swinging with energy and strength training at VO2 max…

This 60-YO businesswoman's journey is #goals!

How it began

"In 2015, I was diagnosed with COPD, ILD, lung capacity restriction, and subacute hypersensitivity pneumonitis....
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp

By Team LukeSuccess Stories, Newcopd, ILD, lung capacity, subacute hypersensitivity pneumonitis, testimonial0 Comments
Read more...
19MarMarch 19, 2024

From Needle-Pricking Pain to Smoother Skin: This 71-YO’s Eczema Journey Spells Hope
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:17:55+05:30From needle-pricking pain to smoother and shinier skin: This 71-year-old’s eczema journey spells hope

Where we started

Where we are

"Today, her skin has cleared and become smoother and shinier than ever. My mom was diagnosed with eczema 1.5 years ago. We tried Ayurveda and other treatments a year back but nothing seemed to have worked. The...
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp

By Team LukeSuccess Stories, Newautoimmune condition, autoimmune disorders, Eczema, eczema flare ups, eczema management, success story, testimonial0 Comments
Read more...
11MarMarch 11, 2024

Aditi Lost Stubborn Fat, Regained Confidence, and Got Years of Gut Issues Under Control in 90 Days!
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:17:58+05:30Think your gut health and hormones don’t affect fat loss? Think again.

Meet Aditi, who lost stubborn fat, regained confidence, and got years of gut issues under control in 90 days!

Where it all began

"When I would say I am severely constipated, I would get suggestions like try drinking more water, consuming more fiber, and laxatives....
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp


By Team LukeSuccess Stories, NewChronic constipation, flatulence, gut issues, hypothyroid, Poor sleep, Scanty periods0 Comments
Read more...

28FebFebruary 28, 2024

Ulcerative Colitis: From 22 Motions Per Day And Losing 26 Kgs To Finding Hope Again
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:18:02+05:30This 30-year-old woman came to us with a severe case of Ulcerative Colitis. Her flare-ups made her pass more than 22-23 motions per day with blood in her stools.

"I couldn't even walk 80 steps a day or sleep at night. I shed 26 kgs in 3 months and underwent massive hair fall. I was...
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp

By Team LukeSuccess Stories, Newautoimmune condition, gut health, gut issues, gut-brain axis, success story, testimonial, ulcerative colitis0 Comments
Read more...

06FebFebruary 6, 2024

Same Shirt, 2 Months Apart: How Samarth Lost 10 kg and 7 Inches in 60 Days
Team Luke2024-09-17T13:18:09+05:30Same shirt, 2 months apart

How Samarth lost 10 kg and 7 inches in 60 days

When the power of discipline, consistency, and lifestyle work together.
When he came to us, he was struggling with
Compromised gut health

Excess body fat

Raised HbA1C

Deranged lipid levels

Low energy

And more…

2 months into our program
Samarth lost close to...
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Google +
Email
WhatsApp

By Team LukeSuccess Stories, Newcompromised gut health, deranged lipids, excess body fat, fat loss, hba1c, low energy, success, transformation, weight loss0 Comments
Read more...

123Next
About Luke
Healing Philosophy
Ecosystem Overview
Holistic Health Store
Books by Luke Coutinho
Program Enroll
Talks & Collaborations
Awards & Media
Gallery
Program Terms
Integrative Team
Consult with Luke
Consult with Team
Client Stories
LSI Nutrition Courses
Email: info@lukecoutinho.com
Toll Free No: 1800 102 0253
Contact Us
Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy | Luke Coutinho - © Copyright 2021. All Rights Reserved.

Lifestyle

Exercise
This Is the Most Inexpensive and Fastest Way To Burn Belly Fat
 By Luke Coutinho  Exercise, 2022  Balasana, belly fat, body fat, burn belly fat, Calf raises, chair stretches, Chakravakasana, climbing stairs, dance, dance fitness, fastest ways to burn belly fat, fat loss, inexpensive way to burn belly fat, jumping jacks, Lunges, make your bed, microworkouts, Non-Exercise Activity Thermogenesis, sit ups, sofa dips, squats, stretching, Surya Namaskars, Tadasana, thermogenesis, Utkatasana, Virabhadrasana, Vrikshasana, walking, wall sits, yoga asanas  0 Comments
How to lose or burn belly fat?
This is perhaps one of the most googled questions of all time. When it comes to losing body and belly fat, there is one thing that I can tell you with confidence. Extreme diets and fad exercise programs do not work. When you hop onto them, yes, you may lose a couple of kilos and inches at the start. But what you need to ask yourself is can you survive on those extremes for the rest of your life? It is simply unsustainable.

The moment you stop this fad diet or exercise regimen you have been following, you will put that weight and fat on, sometimes more than what you lost. It is the yo-yo effect – typically found in fad diets and weight loss programs. Many others may even hit what we call a plateau.

Most of us think that one hour of rigorous workouts and sweating it out in the gym is all we need. But guess what? We are wrong. When you work out for only that one hour and are sedentary for the rest of the day, you become what is known as sedentary-active. Does this mean you should top your workouts? Absolutely, no. That one hour may be effective to boost blood circulation and improve your heart health, lung capacity, and muscle building. But when it comes to burning belly fat, just an hour is useless and holds no value. What can you do?

Representational image only. Photo Credits: Freepik
Keep it N.E.A.T
Acquaint yourself with the concept that I am sharing with you. Among the many lifestyle changes you could adopt for sustainable fat loss, this could be super effective when done right. And guess what? It doesn’t cost you a penny.

N.E.A.T stands for Non-Exercise Activity Thermogenesis. These are small activities you can do during the day to induce thermogenesis over and above your workout. What is thermogenesis? We have spoken about this before. It is the incredible ability of your body to burn fat, even when you are sitting and are not doing too much.

What are some excellent examples of N.E.A.T activities that you can start today?
Walk and talk. Schedule your calls after your breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Get that work done, while also getting your 10-20 minutes of Vitamin W (walking) after major meals.
Try doing 10 squats, 2 Surya namaskars, or 10 jumping jacks every hour.
Squat to pick up something from the floor.
Stretch to open a cupboard.
Park your car further away from your regular parking spot, so you can get some additional steps.
Choose to walk instead of driving for your errands.
Stretch and fidget in between work.
Binge-watching your favorite show? Hit that pause button every hour, stand up and stretch.
Try doing chair stretches.
Don’t ditch the sofa. Use it innovatively. Have you heard of sofa dips? Try them today.
Brushing your teeth? Standing in the kitchen to prep your meals? Do some calf raises while you are at it.
Take a 10-minute dance break in between your workday. It will get that blood pumping, aid fat loss, and also release feel-good hormones like dopamine, endorphins, and serotonin.
At the airport and have lots of time on your hands? Walk and get some steps.
Do your dishes.
Make your bed at night and in the morning.
Climb those stairs to engage the lower body muscles like calves, hamstrings, glutes, quadriceps, etc.
4-minute Tabata. Try this high-intensity interval training that increases your heart rate rapidly and burns as many calories as you can in a short time. Download a FREE Tabata app on your phone today. Don’t overdo it.
Have a short break? Try a 1-minute plank. If you fail, don’t give up. Start with 15 seconds, then build it up to 30 seconds and gradually to a minute until you master it.
Who says you need equipment to work out? See a wall? Try 1-minute wall sits.
Try a few hip-opening or back-bending asanas during the day. Some excellent yoga asanas you can try include:
Surya Namaskar (Sun Salutations)
Tadasana (Mountain Pose)
Vrikshasana (Tree Pose)
Utkatasana (Chair Pose)
Chakravakasana (Cat-Cow Stretch)
Balasana (Child Pose)
Virabhadrasana (Warrior Pose)
All of this is doable, no matter how busy you are or what the nature of your job is.

Squats. Representational image. Photo Credits: Freepik/benzoix
The benefits of these simple activities go beyond fat burn to also:
Prevent osteoporosis
Build great bone health
Boost healthy blood circulation
Every movement and stretch counts. Even if you only burn 100 calories a day with N.E.A.T activities, multiply that by seven days in a week, the result by four weeks a month, and then by twelve months in a year. All the little movements add up to a considerable amount of calorie burn. It is about small wins every day.

Whether your workout duration is 30 mins or 1 hour, NEAT helps you add movement over and above that. What will help here is a step tracker. There is no magic in 10,000 steps, but it is a good benchmark for us to aim for. It is not easy to get 10,000 steps in one hour of work but is possible if we work out and add movement throughout the day.

What to be careful of?
N.E.A.T movements are not a free ticket to eat more or sneak in extra cookies and cupcakes, but it helps your body burn it better. It does not work alone. Maintain a balanced diet, and look after your sleep, workouts, and emotional health.

Go ahead and sneak these movements into your day! Be as creative as you can. Movement can be medicine for your body and mind when done right.

Disclaimer: Always make an informed choice. If you have a condition that restricts certain types of activities or movements, consult your healthcare and fitness expert before trying them.
Fastest Way To Burn Body Fat
 By Luke Coutinho  Exercise, Lifestyle  belly fat, body fat, exercise, Fat burning tips, fat loss, thermogenesis  1 Comment
When it comes to losing body fat and belly fat, extreme diets and exercise programs do not work. Fads do not work. Yes, maybe it can help reduce a couple of inches, but that is not sustainable. The moment you stop the fad diet or exercise, you simply pile on all that weight you lost, sometimes more than what you lost. This is called a yo-yo effect, which is typical of fad diets and weight loss programs.

 

Amongst all the lifestyle changes that one could adopt for sustainable fat loss is a concept called N.E.A.T. NEAT stands for Non-Exercise Activity Thermogenesis. These are little activities you can do during the day to induce thermogenesis over and above your workout. Thermogenesis refers to our body’s ability to burn fat, even when we are sitting and are not doing too much.

Most of us think that an hour of workout is all we need, thus becoming sedentary active for the rest of the day. That one hour of workout will be great for your heart health, lung capacity, and muscle building, but when it comes to burning belly fat, just an hour is useless and holds no value.

 

Some examples of NEAT include:

Walking during phone calls (20 mins post breakfast, lunch, and dinner).
10 squats / 2 surya namaskars / 10 jumping jacks after every hour.
Squat to pick up something from the floor, stretch to open a cupboard.
Park your car further away from a parking spot, so you can get additional steps.
Choose to walk instead of drive, if you have to go to a place nearby.
Stretch and fidget in between work.
Stand up and stretch while watching TV or even do a wall-sit!
Chair stretches.
Calf raises, while standing to cook.
Dance for 10 minutes in between work.
At the airport and have lots of time on your hands? Walk and get some steps.
A few hip opening or back bending asanas during the day.
Do your own dishes.
Make your own bed in the morning and at night.
Calf raises, while brushing your teeth.
 

All of this is doable, no matter how busy you are, and what the nature of your job is. Even stretching is a NEAT movement and induces thermogenesis.

Why do it?

The benefits are beyond burning fat and staying healthy; they also:

Help prevent osteoporosis.
Build great bone health.
Build healthy circulation.
 

Every movement, every stretch counts. Even if you only burn 100 calories a day with NEAT activities, multiply that by seven days in a week, the result into four weeks a month, and then by twelve months in a year. All the little movements add up to a considerable amount of calorie burn. Whether your workout duration is 30 mins or 1 hour, NEAT helps you add movement over and above that. What will help here is a step tracker. There is no magic in 10,000 steps, but it is a good benchmark for us to aim for. It is not easy to get 10,000 steps in one hour of work, but is definitely possible if we workout, plus add in movement throughout the day.

 

Now, NEAT movements are not a free ticket to eat more, or sneak in extra cookies and cupcakes, but it definitely helps your body burn it better.
Best Bodyweight Exercises To Get Shredded
 By Luke Coutinho  Exercise, 2020  Body weight, core routine, Fat burning, Fitness, Top Exercises  0 Comments
How do you want to come out of lockdown? Fitter and healthier, or fatter and sicker? A lot of us put up excuses around gyms being shut, or having no access to personal trainers. As much as that may be a discomfort for most of us, here are few body weight exercises to the rescue!

 

No matter what your weight is – 60 kg, 70 kg, 80 kg or more, it is your body weight that you can use to boost your muscle growth, stamina and endurance, burn fat, and increase your metabolism and much more. We should be able to carry our body weight and handle it. If for whatever reason, you cannot handle your weight nor do a simple pull-up, push-up or a plank, you need to start thinking about your future years, because that means your own body, muscles, joints and spine will not be able to support your weight. Of course, some people cannot handle their weight because of genuine issues like an injury, surgery, spinal issues or excess body fat, but for everyone else, this is an important aspect of fitness.

 

The following are some simple body weight exercises that have been done for decades by pro athletes, elite trainers, army soldiers and body builders. All of them have these exercises in their fitness regime, whether they practice Pilates, weight lifting, CrossFit or even yoga. The beauty of these exercises is that they train every single muscle of your body and that is the key to overall fitness. The same old routine of Monday to Friday workouts that involve – leg day, back day, upper body day, and core day may lead to missing out on minor muscles if we do not engage in these body weight exercises. Using a workout machine limits us to use the same muscles every single time. Use machines if you have to, but also engage other muscles with body weight training.

 

Where do I start? If you are beginner, start with one exercise a day. Even if you do one rep a day, it is great. As you develop more strength, you can gradually aim for 5 – 10 repetitions or more. These are free and will not cost you even a penny.

 

Push-ups: Irrespective of gender, this exercise is for all. Push-ups are about your will and your skill. Once you learn how to do a basic push-up, it is one of the most fabulous exercises to adhere to. It is a mandatory exercise in defence forces that enables soldiers to train their upper body, shoulders, back, core, chest and glutes. Start with a single push-up and once you have mastered its technique and form, start aiming for higher repetitions. You can gradually add variations like close-handed, diamond, wide-armed and so on. These variations will endlessly challenge and strengthen your muscles every time you do them.
 

Pull-ups: The ability to do a pull up defines the level of strength and fitness. The best investment you can make right now is to get a pull-up bar and master a basic pull-up. If you cannot do a pull-up, begin by simply hanging on it to recruit and strengthen your back and arms. Apply variations here as well, like chin-ups, close-handed, wide-handed and more. As you develop strength, you can even strap on additional weight like a weighted vest. No other weight training exercise recruits the number of muscles at a single time than a pull-up does, and that is why it is difficult at first.
Some people have never even stepped into a gym but engage themselves in pull-ups and have chiselled, ripped and lean bodies. While this may not necessarily be your goal, it even works for body toning, boosting metabolism and fat loss. There are ample variations for beginners like a supported pull-up. Nevertheless, make it a part of your lifestyle!

 

Lunges and Squats: These are the best exercises for the lower body. They train your quads, glutes, hamstrings, calves and core. If they are easy for you, add variations. If variations become easy too, add plyometrics! So, squat and jump, and then squat again. Similarly, you can try jumping lunges. The idea is to keep challenging your body when it starts to get too easy for you. If you have weak knees, an injury or torn ligaments, please take professional guidance before you try this.
 

Planks: These exercises target your core and have so many variations again like pylo planks, side planks, push-up planks, twisted plank, walking plank, forearm plank, and many more. A weak core could mean lower back and neck pains, and planks are perfect for your core. It also targets belly fat.
 

Bridge: This is similar to the bridge pose in yoga, also called Setu Bandhasana. Lie down on your back, fold your legs and lift your butt up and down. This exercise targets your legs, lower back, hamstrings, glutes, core, and quads.
 

Supermans: These are great to strengthen your lower back and core region (mind you, your core is not just your six-pack, but also the sides and back of your abdominal region). One can time the holds to develop strength and stamina, gradually add variations and multiple repetitions too.
 

Calf raises: These can be easily done anywhere, even at the office or while you are standing in a long queue. One can do them with toes pointing towards the front, sideways as well as inwards, and this helps target every single part of your calves. If it gets too easy, hold a weight or add some ankle weights for additional resistance.
 

Mountain climbers: This is a great cardio-cum-weight training exercise. It targets the shoulders, core, legs, glutes, hamstrings, back muscles and many other muscles, which no other exercise can.
 

Jumping jacks and Skipping: These too are fantastic body weight exercises that come with a bit of plyometrics. If you do not have a skipping rope, skip with an imaginary one.
 

These exercises do not cost you any money. All you need is your body weight, a few minutes, and discipline to take out those few minutes for yourself. And, you do not have to kill yourself with these exercises. Start slowly with a gradual build-up and keep challenging your body. Some of them may be difficult, but not impossible. Even if you have a goal of lifting heavy weights at the gym, first start with body weight exercises and then progress to other exercises. It is important to learn how to crawl before starting to walk. In most gyms, people ego-lift, which is trying to lift more weight than others, simply to show off, and in turn, end up injuring themselves terribly. There is always a proper training for everything, and body weight exercises should be everyone’s starting point.

 

If you can do these exercises, it speaks volumes about your fitness levels, the strength of your core, stamina and endurance. Ideally, we should be able to do these exercises even when we are 70 or 80 years of age, and some senior citizens do them. So, start now!

 

You can find each of these exercises on YouTube or have your trainer demonstrate them, but please get the basic form and technique correct.

 

Disclaimer: Safety first! Please make an informed decision and seek your health expert’s guidance before beginning any of these exercises, especially if you have an injury, or are recovering from a recent surgery.

Top Health Benefits Of Surya Namaskars
 By Luke Coutinho  Exercise, 2020, Lifestyle, Mental Health  breathing, posture, surya namaskar, yoga  0 Comments
It can be quite easy to neglect workouts when life gets busier. Everyone dreams of being fit and getting a flatter belly, but seldom they’ve time for extended workouts. Even active individuals who are otherwise pretty disciplined when it comes to workout, fail to maintain the schedule when travelling or any other commitment comes in the way. Also, there are a lot of people who long for that peace of mind but often find it hard to meditate. Like the old saying goes, “Where there is a will, there’s a way”, you don’t need extended hours at the gym or longer minutes of silence to attain that physical and mental goals, you can still achieve these goals despite being fairly busy with a simple form of exercise – Surya Namaskars !

Surya Namaskars, also known as sun salutations, were practiced thousands of years ago by saints who used to worship the Sun. Surya means sun, the creator of all things and Nama means to bow or to worship. There are about 12 mantras to be chanted (seen in picture below) to offer our prayers and gratitude to the Sun (which many people across the word worship because of its powers. In fact, it is believed that the Sun is critical for our existence. Apart from offering a prayer and gratitude, it is also a wonderful exercise. It involves all the parts of the body and helps to increase stamina, strength and endurance with regular practice.


Surya Namaskar, is also known as ‘The Ultimate Asana’. It has physical, emotional and spiritual benefits. Surya Namaskars help to improve flexibility and strength (physical benefit); helps to calm the mind and activate blocked chakras of the body (emotional and mental benefit) and also helps to calm the soul when mantra chanting is involved (spiritual benefit).

Surya Namaskar is a combination of 8 asanas and 4 of them are repeated (so total is 12 asanas) to complete one set of Surya Namaskar. It engages almost 92% of the body’s muscles from head to toe thus it helps to strengthen our back, lower body, upper body as well as core muscles. It also improves metabolism and helps to lose belly fat. It also improves blood circulation which in turn imparts a glow on your face and even releases toxins out of the body. It helps in spine strengthening which is literally the backbone of the body as most nerves of the body pass through the spine. Furthermore, it helps in boosting the performance of sluggish glands and improves irregular menstrual cycles. In a nutshell, it is a comprehensive workout that benefits the entire body – when done at a slower pace, helps to improve flexibility; when done at a moderate pace helps to improve the muscular tone and when done at a fast pace it helps to lose weight.

Let’s understand the stepwise benefits of Surya Namaskar:

Pranamasana: Also called the Prayer pose, it is the step 1 and step 12 of Surya Namaskar. It is the simplest one. This helps to calm the mind, nervous system and the body as you begin your exercise. It helps to balance the Heart Chakra.
Hastottanasana: Also called The Raised Arms pose, it is the step 2 and step 11 of Surya Namaskar. This asana helps to improve flexibility, reduces back pain and strengthens the spinal cord. It also releases the tension around the neck muscles. It expands the lungs and thus oxygen carrying capacity of the body increases. This is beneficial for those having chronic throat problems.  It helps to balance the throat Chakra.
Hasta Padasana: Also called as Standing Forward Bend, it is the step 3 and step 10 of Surya Namaskar. This posture helps strengthen the back, abdominal muscles, and nervous system. It also stretches the calves and glutes muscles. This asana increases the blood flow to the brain which helps in improving memory and focus. Also, it increases blood flow to the abdominal area thereby improving the digestive system. It helps to balance solar plexus chakra.
Ashwa Sanchalanasana: Also known as Equestrian pose, it is the step 4 and step 9 of the Surya Namaskar. It helps in increasing the flexibility of the legs. This asana stretches your spine further along with quadriceps and iliopsoas (hip) muscles. It also stimulates your abdominal organs.  It helps to balance the heart chakra and third eye chakra and solar plexus chakra.
Chaturanga Dandasana: The shoulder plank pose, it is the step 5 of Surya Namaskar. It will tone your wrists, legs, and build arm muscles. It puts pressure on the core muscles and it’s an excellent asana for reducing belly fat. The dandasana improves body posture and aligns your back muscles and spine in one straight line. It activates solar plexus chakra.
Ashtanga Namaskar: Also known as the 8 limbed poses, it is the step 6 of Surya Namaskar. This asana strengthens the chest, arms and legs. It is beneficial on lower abdominal organs and it balances the whole body. It balances the sacral chakra, root chakra and solar plexus chakra
Bhujangasana: Also called as Cobra pose, it is the step 7 of Surya Namaskar.  It helps to reduce headache and backache.  It relieves tension from the neck, back and spine. It promotes flexibility of the spine, improves posture, thereby helping to prevent slipped discs. It helps in balancing the Sacral Chakra.
Adho Mukha Svanasana: Also known as Downward facing dog pose, it is the step 8 of Surya Namaskar. It has multiple benefits such as relief from stress, improved circulation, enhanced respiration, better posture, etc. It makes your arms and legs stronger and relieves varicose veins. It also stretches calf and spine muscles. It activates the Sacral chakra.
As you start practising Surya Namaskars on a daily basis, you should aim to focus on your posture at every step. Do not be in a rush to do more rounds without mastering each step. It’s important to be consistent with the practice and then aim to take your practice to the next level. In the next level, you can start focusing on breathing which involves rhythmic inhalations and exhalations as demonstrated in the image below. In the further advanced level, you can focus on building your spiritual connection as you practice Surya Namaskar, you can chant one Mantra at a time in the ascending order and aim to do at least 12 rounds of surya namaskar.


The ideal time to perform Surya Namaskar is during sunrise while facing towards the sun. But it may not be possible to do it in this fast-paced life and hence instead of missing it, doing it whenever it suits your schedule is preferred as ultimately, it’s a workout that has both meditative and physiological benefits. Just make sure you do it with an empty stomach or at least a gap of 2-3 hours after a meal. Also, it’s best to begin your practice in the presence of a trained professional if you’re a beginner. It’s not advisable for people with very high blood pressure, recent surgery, severe back pain etc and it’s best to practice Shawasana for a couple of minutes as you end your Surya Namaskars.

How to Keep Mind and Body Fit at Home ?
 By Luke Coutinho  Exercise, Lifestyle  exercise, healthy, lifestyle, mental fitness, physical fitness  0 Comments
Exercises, both physical as well as mental are often the most neglected pillars of lifestyle the moment life gets busy. It’s quite common to hear “I missed my workouts because we were travelling or we had meetings all day or we had social commitments or I missed my meditation because I did not get time or my mind wasn’t stable” and so on. On the other hand, we have some people doing their workout for an hour but are sedentary the whole day , these are called “sedentary active” people and thus their workout won’t reap targeted benefits and hence we should always prefer activity with exercise or activity over exercises . Likewise, if you engage in a good meditation/chanting for an hour but rest of the day you keep shouting or cribbing or complaining about things, that meditation isn’t going to help you to achieve that perfect mental peace.

Exercise is the simplest and most inexpensive way to shed off any kind of anxiety and boost the endorphins aka happy hormones. Exercises can improve blood circulation and thus facilitate the reach of oxygen and nutrients in every cell of the body. Also, exercise induces sweating which further has multiple benefits like removing toxins from your body, balancing electrolytes, balancing body temperature, boosting skin glow , boosting immunity as it has antimicrobial peptides in it etc. One must not use any kind of antiperspirants to block the sweat glands, else the toxins aren’t released and that can create a toxic overload in the body.  Exercises when done the right way keeps you moving, burning calories, helps you maintain body weight, maintain joint health and flexibility, preserving/building muscle tissue and releases stress.

Life can get busy with traveling, work, social life or at times we are unable to get to our preferred health and fitness facility for a workout despite having a desire to workout.

However, workouts do not have to be complex. In fact we notice that some of the most effective exercises are also the simplest . Here are some simple ways to stay physically and mentally active at home. These do not require anything, except self discipline. We can use our own body weight for the number of these exercises too.

 

Physical Fitness:
Stairs : You can take a quick trip to stairs – up and down to get your heart racing and get working on your core, glutes and calf muscles too. It’s the simplest and the easiest way to burn more fat. However care needs to be taken if you have a knee pain as it can worsen it if not done in the right manner.
Wall sits : These can be done anywhere anytime.  For eg : till the time you wait for your tea to get ready or coffee to brew , you can do a couple of repetitions of wall sits which keeps your core and lower body (thigh and glutes) engaged.
Chair: Move to the front of the seat and don’t use backrest and this engages core muscles. You can sit on a medicine ball too if you have one. Since you will be sitting on the edge automatically your posture will be upright allowing you to breathe more freely and thus enough oxygen reaches the cells of the body to help the brain function better, improve alertness, better idea and focus. See to it that feet are kept flat on the ground while doing this activity.
Stretches: We all know sitting is the new smoking and thus it’s very important to stand up after every hour and stretch the whole body from head to toe. If you’re at work and can’t stretch freely, you can check a quick desk stretch on online. Also, sitting for a longer time can make you slouch and this improper posture can hurt the lower back or upper back in the long run, hence conscious breaks every few hours is a must.
Post Meal walk : This is the simplest practice you can adopt to make sure your gut health is in place as well as blood sugar levels are balanced. You can do 10-15 mins of mild walking, 30 mins after you finish your meal. Doing it after breakfast, lunch and dinner will make sure your activity through the day is well divided.
Active loo breaks: You can make some workout targets for the day to finish a list of exercises and sets. If you’ve a busy day, you can choose to do one exercise with the number of sets pre decided after every visit to the washroom. By the end of the day you’ll have all your workout targets well achieved despite being a “busy” day.
NEAT activities: These are Non Exercise Activity induced Thermogenesis. We can take up some fun activities like gardening, cleaning , domestic chores (getting your own water, food, keeping plates post a meal, getting remote control by yourself , opening doors etc.) , playing with kids, organizing shelves etc. which will allow a lot of movements targeting different sets of muscles in the body.
Online workouts : With the digitalised era, everything is accessible on tips of your fingers. You can download apps like Cult, Workout woman, Hasfit, NTC , Sworkit etc; or you can browse websites like popsugar fitness, fitness blender etc can be used to bring about the variations and creativity in your workouts.
Eye Workout : With screen exposure increasing across all age groups, it’s very very essential we spend few hours of the day off the screen and also take short breaks while at work to do a quick eye exercise routine which involves eye ball rotations, contractions – relating and focusing on an object at a distance as well as tip of the nose. A regular practice of these will make sure circulation around the eyes is optimal. Care to be taken to switch phones and gadgets to dark mode in the evenings and preferably use a blue cut reading glasses to protect the eyes further.
Body weight exercise: You can target the whole body or part of the body and can do a whole workout session. Best would be to choose 5-7 exercises and do a couple of repetitions with some breaks in between for rest. Some of the body weight exercises you can do are : Jumping Jacks, Wall Sit, Push ups, Crunches, squats, tricep dips using chair, planks, high knees, lunges, push ups etc. Also, many Yoga asanas can be done at home without any equipment. Consider seeking a professional if it contraindicates your health.
Passive Exercises : This is especially for bedridden patients who cannot walk or move. Simply pressing their soles of the feet and assisting them in some stretches like raising hand up and down, raising each leg up and down, neck rotations etc shall help in getting the circulatory and lymphatic system activated.
              Mental Fitness :

Chanting : Chanting a prayer or a mantra can quickly calm you down as you awaken your spiritual side. Eg : Omkar Chants, Gayatri Mantra, Bhramari pranayama.
Deep Breathing : Most sedentary people have shallow breathing. We have to be conscious and start breathing deeply as the presence of oxygen in the body can reduce the chances of illness by boosting immunity. Deep breathing can shift your body from sympathetic nervous system to parasympathetic nervous system which is responsible for rest and relaxation. It can instantly help you reduce BP by certain points and brings down anxiety in stressful situations.
Meditation: You can do any form of meditation which suits you – via Heartfulness, Insight timer app , Vedic Mantra app, calm app. These are some of the platforms you can explore if you’re a beginner and need some guidance. You can also check for global meditations that are held by professionals and join them live.
Pranayama : A daily routine of pranayama can help you stay in peace of mind for a long time. You can include cleansing techniques like kapalbhati followed by alternate nostril breathing, bhramari pranayama, ujjayi pranayama, bhastrika etc. Doing it with the right technique will help you reap maximum benefits and help you to slow down your heart rate as well. Pranayama can facilitate more oxygen circulating in the cells of the body. Care should be taken that every pranayama may not suit your health condition and seeking professional guidance is recommended.
Visualisations , Affirmations, Journaling : All of these have deep relation with a healthy mind and body. You can start gradually to list down things you’re grateful for, things you want to accept and let go and finally some affirmations related to self health. Also, closing eyes and sitting in silence while visualising yourself in better mind and body shape shall work like a therapy. You must avoid using negative words like Not, never, don’t etc while writing affirmations. Affirmations work best when you write assertively in present tense.
For optimal health, over and above these physical and mental fitness, it is also important to remember to sleep well, eat enough proteins, good fats, vitamins and minerals through a balanced meal and stay hydrated. Also, it’s important to seek professional advice for you to be aware of the contraindications for a specific exercise.

The Health Benefits Of Malasana (Garland Pose)
 By Luke Coutinho  Exercise, 2020, Lifestyle  constipation, digestion, malasana, yoga  0 Comments
Seated for too long? Constipated? Tight hips? Sluggish digestion? The answer is MALASANA or garland pose.

The wisdom of yoga has an answer for every single health issue – either through the way we eat, sleep, breathe, think, move.

Malasana is your answer if you have been complaining of constipation, lower back pains, sciatica pains, tight hips and so much more. Malasana is actually the most natural ways to sit, rest everything else is man-made.

 

Benefits of Malasana:

Constipation:
Indian toilets are scientifically designed. When our ancestors sat down on the floor in a squatting position to pass a motion, that enabled a proper alignment for easier evacuation. This was then taken over by Western commodes and now again people are again getting back to squatty potty or stools realising the importance of squats. However, if you are constipated, try sitting in malasana for 1-2 minutes. You could even try sipping on a glass of warm water while in this pose and notice how it helps ease your bowel movements.

 

Apart from stools, malasana can also help release trapped gases in cases of flatulence and bloating.

 

Breaks you from being sedentary
We are sitting way more than what we have been designed to and hence issues like obesity, belly fat, spondylosis, cervical issues, sciatica are on the rise. Humans have been designed to move. Chair is the worst invention by man because it keeps us chained to it, even worse – ultra soft cushions and recliners that completely spoil our spine alignment. Getting into a malasana is a great way to give your body a break from sitting and also helps improve posture. While at work, you can also take your calls and answer to texts in this position.

 

A powerful hip opener and circulation booster
Tight hips, calves and poor circulation are an outcome of living a sedentary lifestyle. Malasana helps reactivate blood circulation around the hip region that actually stagnates when we sit, opens up your hips and groin, boosts pelvic, back health, opens up tight hamstrings thereby increasing mobility. Take breaks from the chair and sit like this even for a minute or less and breathe. It will help open up your hips and relax the lower back, glutes, hamstrings. Better blood circulation also helps keep your reproductive organs healthy

 

Helps tone the body
Malasana helps bring muscle tone in your glutes, tights and around your belly as it engages all the muscles concerned.

 

Digestion stimulator
As you sit in Malasana, you will notice a certain kind of a pressure on your lower abdomen. This pressure helps gently massage your digestive organs thereby stimulating them to secrete enzymes and digestive juices. Result: improved digestion!

 

Spiritually, since malasana gets our body close to the ground (mother earth in specific), it gives the feeling of safety, grounding and calm to the practitioner.
 

Malasana Variation: Take it a step further and try twisting your torso 2-3 times sideways to help further tone your body and stimulate your digestion as it also helps gently massage your digestive organs.
 

If you are unable to sit flat on your feet because it feels tight, try sitting on your toes. You should get there with consistent practice. One could also take the support of a wall to rest their back in the beginning.
 

Do it anytime and as often as you can – morning or whenever you find yourself sedentary. Teach this to your kids too.
 

Contraindications:
Avoid this asana if you have severe knee issues, especially a surgery. Or seek guidance from a qualified teacher.

Top 4 Health Benefits Of Walking
 By Luke Coutinho  Exercise, Lifestyle  benefits of walking, exercise, walking, walking for health  0 Comments
Often people ask about Vitamins that would suit their health. Can I have a vitamin for my hair, my kidney, my liver?  Do I need a vitamin for my heart? Do I need a vitamin to lose weight? We need to understand that vitamins may be needed when there is a deficiency, or when you are on certain medications that are known to deplete vitamins and minerals from our body, which is why they are called as a supplement. However, what I want to discuss about in this blog is Vitamin W. It’s not a vitamin that you will get via food or pill. It is a vitamin, called “Walking”. We all know how good walking is for us, so let’s look into some of its benefits.

Walking –

-Is inexpensive and free

-You can do it anytime, anywhere, subject to the weather.

-Is a super helpful vitamin for every condition, be it cancer, heart disease, kidney problem provided you are physically able to walk.

Each of us must start investing in walking because besides yoga, walking is that one drug that all of us can add to our lifestyles. Whether you are in your 30’s, 40’s, 50’s or even 80’s, you can do it. You may not be able to deadlift, bench-press or do CrossFit, but you can walk and do yoga.

So many people live sedentary lifestyles and have sedentary jobs today. And even if you do a one-hour workout, it doesn’t mean that you are active if you find yourself chained to the desk for the remainder of the day. Instead this means you are “Sedentary active”. Now that’s a huge problem because our bodies were never designed to sit for a long period of time. It was never designed to be sedentary. I understand some of us have real problems like corporate jobs that requires you to sit, but still, if there is a will to walk and stay active, there is a way.

If we really sit down and introspect into our lives, we will find time to walk whether it’s a 10 min, 20 min or a one hour walk. You can walk at airports, malls and wherever you want to. Just that you need to have that motivation to do so. Science tells us that even a ten-minute walk is enough to get your circulation moving in a way that is positive for the body. It is enough for you to change your cortisol levels (stress hormone)

It’s all about pulling out those 10 minutes out of our busy day to make time for our health. Else we’ll have to spend more time at hospitals and handling illness. 

Diabetes and Walking:
Talking about Diabetes, one of the most powerful lifestyle changes to heal your condition is walking. Make it a habit to walk for 10-15 mins after 30 min gap post meals.  So, whether it’s post breakfast, lunch or dinner, make it a habit to walk after a 30 min gap. You can even begin with one meal in a day. Please make sure you leave a 30 min gap though, because you don’t want to be active after a meal as all the blood circulation should be directed towards the digestive system to facilitate digestion. It works fantastic for Type 2 diabetes in terms of sugar levels as well as heart health. We all know that the root cause of most heart problems is inflammation and inflammation come down when we have the right amount of circulation. Circulation is brought about by exercise. You are free to choose exercises you love, but walking which is something that can be done without a gym or trainer.

Depression and Walking:
There are so many people who are slipping into depression or are already depressed. Depression and anxiety are becoming a huge problem for human health because it upsets your entire hormonal balance, as your body is constantly producing cortisol. One of the best ways to melt away anxiety is Walking. When you start walking here, you start breathing better and most people under depression don’t breathe the right way. They either exhibit short breathing patterns or are hyperventilating. This means less oxygen going in and more carbon dioxide storage, which is why it can make one feel dizzy and nauseous. or may even undergo an anxiety attack and pass out.

So, when you walk or exercise, you automatically start regulating your breathing which means you start taking in more oxygen. The more oxygen you inhale, the more balanced are your cortisol levels and progesterone, testosterone, oestrogen, androgens as a result (including thyroxine and insulin). It’s all interconnected.

Another thing is, when you start walking, you’re distracting your mind from the problem. Generally, when you are depressed, you tend to focus on all the negatives, you form a shell around you and start to move deeper and deeper into that shell.  Hence distraction can be very useful.  It could be going out, speaking to a friend, listening to music, reading a book or even walking. If you start engaging in walking, you immediately create a distraction. If you’re lucky and live in a place where you have access to nature, even better. It brings immediate calmness that is going to reduce your anxiety immediately. It’s a different thing in the city though, unless you find parks or gardens dedicated for walking.

A ten-minute walk is a great mood changer because when you walk, your body starts producing endorphins. So, if you find yourself angry, depressed or have any sort of negative emotions coming in your mind, just cut yourself away from the situation and get in a walk. When you distance yourself from the trigger (whether it’s a person, boss, spouse or an event), immediately distancing yourself from the trigger will help you calm down. Come back to it later, since you can’t walk away from all your problems in life, but whenever you come back, you surely will be calmer state and will have the ability to use rationale.

Lastly, when you are anxious or depressed and sedentary at the same time, that makes the whole situation all the worse. You tend to have a lot of unused energy which gets unutilised. Energy has to flow. So, if it’s not being utilized into an exercise or walk, it may be channelized into magnifying all the problems you have.

Bone health and walking:
For every man and woman, bone health becomes a matter of concern after 40’s and 50’s. It’s unfortunate that we have young people with osteoporosis, which was initially more of a woman related problem because post menopause they lose calcium and bone mineralisation reduces. But not any longer. We have young men with bone density issues too because of sedentary lifestyles. Back pain, knee pain is becoming common too because our bodies are designed to work better when it’s active.

Often people misunderstand weight-bearing exercise. Weight bearing doesn’t mean one has to lift weights. Walking is a weight-bearing exercise, so is climbing steps, jogging, mountain climbing. Weight bearing can simply involve your body-weight too.

Now, a lot of people say they have knee pain and they can’t walk. If your knee pain is so excruciating that you can’t even walk 10 minutes, respect your body and give it rest. But also understand that knees become weak because the cartilage and muscles around it aren’t strong enough. In order to make then strong, walking is the least you can go. It’s painful in the beginning, but worth it. Start slow and gradually build up.

Walking makes your muscles and core strong. If you have been going to a gym, you’d know how sore muscles are for the first few days. This is because exercises break down your muscle fibres, but that the same time when those muscle fibres repair, they end up becoming stronger. Similar is the case with your knees. A little pain shouldn’t be an obstacle for you.

The more you walk, the more you will be able to prevent the onset of diseases and there is a great possibility that your doctor will reduce your medication.

Creativity and walking:
When you walk, your creative juices also flow. Most people get their ideas whether it’s business or a plan that you want to make, when they are walking. If the walk is in nature, even better.

How much can one walk?

There is no magic number, but 10,000 steps can be a great benchmark. One can use a step tracker that reminds you to get in steps whenever you are being too stationary. You are free to use any band; however, I like to use Apple or GOQii. There are some phones that have in-built trackers too. So, choose what works for you, but set a benchmark because sometimes we get so lost in our lives that we forget how active we have been in the day.

I always work with a number because like they say, “you got to measure what you do, and that’s what turns out into a result”. So, if you have a benchmark today of 2000 steps make that 3000 steps and then take it up to 4k, 5k or even 8k.

So, whatever it takes, you want to start adding some walking daily. You may be able to achieve 2000 steps to begin with. That’s completely fine. Set it as a benchmark and try to do better the next day. Adjust and set goals as you travel. When I am in India, my target it 10k steps, but when I am in the US, I aim for 20k steps.

If you get walking into your lifestyle, you are going to notice a change in every aspect of your health. Human body needs activity, it doesn’t need a one-hour workout alone. Don’t be dependent on your drivers and servants. They are great resources for help if you need it but don’t let that limit your activity.

Women who handle all the household chores like cooking, running errands, shopping, etc don’t even need to go to a gym because your body gets enough activity it needs.

Look at your life and think of ways you can improve your activity levels. Figure out your own goal, don’t base it on what people around you talk or say. Once you have your goal figured, try to aim for the everyday. Every time you meet that goal, you automatically get self-motivated and self-motivation is the missing drug today. So is vitamin D, which is discipline.

Heart Diseases: Types, Causes And Treatments
 By Luke Coutinho  2018, Condition Management, Exercise, Lifestyle  cholesterol, hdl, heart, heart health, ldl, world heart day  4 Comments
We celebrate these days every year, Cancer day, diabetes day and tomorrow we have World Heart Day. Heart diseases lead to the most amount of suffering and deaths in India right now followed by diabetes and cancer. So what’s going wrong when we have hospitals, doctors, pharmaceuticals, medications, vitamins, Ayurveda, gyms and nutritionists? Why are we getting sicker and why are our parents suffering from cardiovascular diseases? Why are teenagers suffering from cardiovascular diseases? Why do we see heart attacks in young people at the age of 24 and 25?

Lifestyle Drug

The only drug that can prevent and heal heart disease is called lifestyle. When we start to make small changes in lifestyle you will find that you no longer have to be on the deadly medications that you’re on which is making you sicker and sicker and causing more diseases ranging from diabetes to kidney failure and even most cancers. Now I’m not here to tell you to get off your statins or get off your cholesterol drugs. I’m here to create awareness in the hope that it motivates you to understand what exactly causes cardiovascular disease and that that magic drug is in your hands. Make a change right now.

Demonizing Cholesterol

We live in a world where we believe that cholesterol is the number one cause of cardiac arrests and strokes. Let me tell you, you are completely wrong. That’s what the media and most doctors make us believe that cholesterol causes heart disease. Infact cholesterol has very little connection with most cardiac arrests, most strokes and most heart attacks .The leading cause of most cardiac arrests and heart diseases today is high blood pressure. Then you have chronic kidney disease and inflammation.

Statistical Deception

No one measures inflammation or CRP, that is C – reactive protein which is a protein molecule which is one of them best markers for cardiac arrests and poor heart disease but we have angiograms, angioplasties, bypass surgeries, cholesterol tests and all of these things. We look at these parameters on reports which help us benchmark our health but give us no cure to the disease that we’re going through. So you look at your total cholesterol and your doctor decides that you need to be on a drug and he puts you on a statin which has every connection with diabetes, muscular pain, fatigue, cardiac arrest, strokes and cancers as well.

Chronic Inflammation

The number one cause of most cardiac arrests today is chronic inflammation. What is inflammation? If you fall down and you bruise your knee, the area around your knee swells up. Now the blood is rushing towards your bruised area to repair you. The cells around your knee area multiply and divide rapidly to heal you and to form that scar. As you can see we require inflammation. But in case of Chronic Inflammation where inflammation doesn’t reduce it causes heart diseases and cancers. Smoking, alcohol or binge drinking, poor quality sleep will cause inflammation. Fast foods, processed food, food rich in sugar, high salt consumption will not only cause high blood pressure but will also cause the destruction of your arteries in your heart. So now we see the connection towards cardiac arrest is poorly managed high blood pressure and inflammation.

Acidity & Magnesium Depletion

If you are acidic, your body leeches’ calcium, vitamin d, magnesium and alkaline salts from your gallbladder increasing cholesterol production in your liver. Magnesium is being used to keep your blood alkaline. It is one of the most important minerals when it comes to your heart health. So here we are treating people with cholesterol medications but never looking at their magnesium and potassium levels when they have high blood pressure. Two minerals are enough to enhance the health of your heart.

Vitamin D3 & Cholesterol  

Cholesterol is required in the human body. It is so important that you understand this today. A statin works in your liver by blocking an enzyme that produces cholesterol. So you’re shutting down the production of cholesterol. Cholesterol is required for your cells to heal, to grow and to repair. You have cells in your body which will no longer heal and that’s the problem that can lead to cancer. We all know cancer originates in a cell which is sick, a cell which cannot kill itself. Cholesterol is also a precursor to your hormones. Vitamin d3 is a hormone that requires cholesterol to be produced. If you don’t have cholesterol you have low d3. So your doctor instead of helping you raise your d3 puts you on a cholesterol tablet. If I have low d3 my liver is going to produce more cholesterol because the body needs more cholesterol to produce more d3. Its is vicious cycle.

Prevention

Let’s discuss the solution. Look at your d3 levels even if your doctor doesn’t look at it. Maintain optimum d3 levels, optimum magnesium levels, potassium levels and blood pressure levels as well. You should have the right amount of calcium for d3 to get absorbed properly. Eat a high-fibre diet which includes three to four fruits in a day and a portion of raw vegetables at each meal. You will give your body the amount of enzymes it needs to repair and reduce the endothelial inflammation in your arteries and protect your heart. Just because you have good cholesterol levels because of your medication on your report doesn’t mean you have good inflammation. Check your H- CRP levels, your homocysteine levels and your CRP levels as well.

What’s the best way to keep your heart healthy?

Exercise. Every single day some movement. I’m not talking about overtraining because we all know overtraining and exercising has also become a fad and that is producing inflammation in people’s heart leading to cardiac arrests, thyroid problems, adrenal fatigue and many other problems. The best exercise for you and for your heart is walk. Your heart needs you to move. Your heart needs some amount of flexibility like yoga or Pilates with the right amount of breathing like pranayama. If you only walk and you do yoga that is enough for your heart.

Sleep & Stress: Most of the cardiac arrests of young people today are caused because of lack of sleep period. Everyone has fancy pictures on their Instagram and Facebook of them working out in the gym and showing the world who they are and what they’re doing and they’re sleeping for three to four hours. No one knows that side of their life and when they die of heart attacks people are like how could it happen and everyone runs to doctors to get their hearts checked and still omitting lifestyle, sleep and recovery. Stress has a direct connection with your cardiovascular health, Every time we keep raising our cortisol because we’re constantly stressed. We are making our liver produce more cholesterol because we need cholesterol to produce hormones. Every time you get stressed your heart is working harder.

Sitting is the new smoking. The more you sit the unhealthier your heart is going to be. It doesn’t matter if you work out one hour in the gym and you’re going to be sitting for the next nine hours. That is called a sedentary active. Your sedentary lifestyle will kill you. Aim for 8000 to 12000 steps in a day. It’s possible and easy and you can do it. Exercise will basically take care of cholesterol.

Improve HDL

Today doctors treat a figure called total cholesterol which is very wrong. They need to look up the break-up of your cholesterol. They need to look at the ratio between your HDL and your LDL. HDL is your good cholesterol. For the longest time the oil mafia removed saturated fats from India. Coconut oil, unrefined ground nut oil, peanut oil, mustard oil, and pure ghee was termed as a saturated fat and doctors moved us to refined vegetable oils which is the number one cause of inflammation in the country. If you have high cholesterol right now change your oil. Start using pure ghee or unrefined or raw coconut oil, mustard oil, peanut oil whatever it is. Get more raw food in your diet. Have three to four fruits and raw vegetables in your diet every single day with the right amount of water to keep your inflammation low.

Please share this information with others if it means anything to you. You don’t need to be a doctor to share knowledge and inspire other people who will change their health. All of us have that in us. We can share and inspire. We can change people’s health through knowledge, through motivation and by making ourselves an example to everyone else.
Top 3 Exercises To Do And Stay Fit While Travelling
 By Luke Coutinho  2018, Exercise  lunge exercises, simple lunge exercises, simple lunges, travelling exercises  0 Comments
When you are travelling, you can try these two simple exercises which can be practiced anytime, anywhere, without the need for equipment. They are simple, quick, and do not require equipment. Lunges work on your back, legs and buttocks It focuses on the two largest muscles of your body, back and legs. Fitness while travelling seems to be a myth. Be it a business tour or just a family outing, not many care to find ways of keeping themselves fit during a vacation. And when you come back from your vacation those weak muscles and extra body fat start bothering you. Well, why give them a chance to bother you in the first place!

Sudarshan Crawl
A sedentary lifestyle can cause an impairment of transportation of blood in the body which in turn may increase the risk of diseases in the heart and blood vessels. Performing simple leg exercises can make a huge change and prevent such problems, a new study reveals. This exercise is not a baby crawl and it can be practiced in limited spaces. All you need to do is stand straight, then bend down to a basic squat position. Slowly, with the help of your palms, crawl forward as far as you can. Then slowly, crawl backwards and come back to the original position. You can add a slight jump at the end. You can practice 10 to 15 of these, it will get your heart rate up and help you burn those extra vacation-calories as well.

Simple Standing Lunge
Lunges work on your back, legs and buttocks. This exercise is by far the best one if you wish to work on these parts of your body. However, you need to be extra careful while practicing lunges because this exercise, if practiced the wrong way, may put pressure on your joints, thereby resulting in pain. Here’s your standard guide to the number of reps for lunges:

3 reps of 10-12 lunges for beginners
4 sets of 12-15 for the intermediate set of people
4 sets of 15-20 reps for people who have been practicing for over 6 to 7 years

Simple standing lunge can be practiced while travelling. These can be practiced anytime, anywhere, all you need is some space. Stand straight, with your hands by your side. Take your right leg forward and then slowly bend your left knee to the ground, keep your right knee at a 90 degree angle. Practice this with both legs and aim for 5, 10, 15 reps with one leg and then switch to the next leg. This workout focuses on the two largest muscles of your body, the back and the legs. The more you work on larger muscles, the more fat you burn and more lean muscle mass you have.

Top 6 Workouts To Get Ripped
 By Luke Coutinho  2018, Exercise, Weight Management  exercise, lifestyle, rest, training, weight loss, workout  0 Comments
We all know it’s all about immunity when it comes to protecting and healing yourself from disease. Gone are the days where walking on a treadmill or working out for 30 to 45 minutes was enough for your body if your goal was fat loss. Everyone reaches a weight loss plateau, that’s how the body functions. At a specific point your body resists you from losing weight because of hormonal issues. Anything can cause a weight loss plateau and everyone goes through it. So if you’re one of those people going through a weight loss plateau, you’ve got to find out a way through nutrition or changing your workout plan to break through that plateau. 

Standard Workout
Today if you look at the conventional way of working out,  you go to a gym, you warm up, you lift a couple of weights and then you’re usually told by a trainer to walk on a treadmill for 15 minutes, 15 minutes on the elliptical, 15 minutes on some other machine. Any movement is good movement but if you’re looking for these specific goals it’s not going to cut it for you. We need to understand how weight loss happens and why extended periods of cardio are actually detrimental to your goal. The more cardio you do the more hungry you feel which means you have to eat. But when people are trying to lose weight they try to eat less and exercise more and that’s what cripples your metabolism. You lose 2, 3, 4 kilos and then all of a sudden stagnate and sometimes you even put on weight

Rest Based Training
Rest Based training is all about stimulating muscle fibre. Whatever exercises you do, it should result in stimulating muscle fibre. You don’t have to just lift weights for this. Something as simple as push-ups, something as simple as squats or planking or a pull-up is enough to stimulate your muscle fibre. Now when you stimulate your muscle fibre, the protein from the food that you eat gets broken down to amino acids which repairs those muscle fibres giving it growth and size and you get something called body tone. The more body tone you have, the more lean mass you have. The more muscle you have, your body also produces a hormone called HGH which is human growth hormone and the more you have of that the higher your metabolic rate is. This is why you will constantly burn fat at any given period of time when you have that amount of lean mass or muscle fibre.

Muscle Fibre
There are two ways of working out. You do a set of weights or you do a set of exercise and you take a break and then you restart that same set again. In rest-based training you stimulate muscle fibre as much as you can and then you rest as much as you need to so that your second set you hit it at the same intensity as the first. So what’s happening is that you are re-stimulating that same muscle fibre again and again. Rest-based training workout wont last for more than 15 to 20 minutes. The conventional way of workout is we do squats and then our second set we do fewer squats and we do a fewer squats because our body gets fatigued. But over here you do as many squats as you can in 45 seconds and you rest as much as you need so that you recover you allow your muscles to recover and then you can hit that next set with the same intensity. Hence you stimulate your fibre with that same intensity and that’s how you have lean mass growth.

E.P.O.C
This works on a science called EPOC that is Exercise Post Oxygen Consumption. When your workouts work on this science you burn calories and fat, your metabolic activity is stimulated for 16 to 24 hours after your workout. For some people that can go on for even 2 days depending on how intense your workout was. Many people can’t do intensive workout so this may not be for them but for all of you who can and you’re looking to break through that Plateau try rest based training. 

15 Minutes
15 minutes is all you need to keep aside for your workout. Now in those 15 minutes select four or five of your favourite exercises. It could be squats, mountain climbing, lunges, jump squats, jump lunge, rows, push-ups, pull-ups; use your body weight and then 45 seconds as many as you can do comfortable pace and then rest as much as you need to and then again as many as you can do in 45 seconds. So you’re allowing recovery and you’re stimulating those muscle fibres and you repeat that process for 15 minutes and you will lose fat, you will break through that plateau, you will start looking leaner, not only that you boost your metabolic activity as well as your immunity.

Difficult than Running?
A lot of people choose running as an exercise. I have no problem with anything that gets you to move and not be sitting in one place.  For example you plan a 5k run. So in that 5k you’re also going to pace yourself out because you need to finish 5k. So you’re not going to run 5k at one consistent intensity. So that pacing takes intensity off your entire exercise model. Over here you continue for 15 minutes with that same hard intensity and you can do it because you allow yourself to rest. You do it because you allow yourself to recover and recovery is everything when it comes to increasing productivity as well as the growth of your muscles and efficient use of your metabolism.

So try this out for the next one week. Break away from your normal programs and do this every alternate day. You may feel a little hungry after these workouts. You should eat because you need recovery and energy to recover from the workout that you did. So it is okay to rest especially when you have high intensity workouts.



Sleep
Healthy DIY
Senior’s Health
Child Health


Condition Management

Cancer
Mental Health
Weight Management
Pregnancy
Women’s Health


Beyond Medicine

Immunity
Yoga and Meditation


Nutrition

Intermittent & Dry Fasting


Recipe Corner
Youcare Products Science
Success Stories
Courses

Courses
Courses Account


Main Website
Programs
Book a Consultation

Consult with Luke
With Integrative Team


Quick Links

Healing philosophy
Talks and Collaborations
The Eco System
Integrative Team
Books
Holistic Health Store


Log InRegister
================================================================================
